  31                                              THE CASE OF THE WHITE
                                                            FOOT-PRINTS

“Well,” said my friend Foxton, pursuing a familiar and apparently
inexhaustible topic, “I’d sooner have your job than my own.”

“I’ve no doubt you would,” was my unsympathetic reply. “I never met a
man who wouldn’t. We all tend to consider other men’s jobs in terms of
their advantages and our own in terms of their drawbacks. It is human
nature.”

“Oh, it’s all very well for you to be so beastly philosophical,”
retorted Foxton. “You wouldn’t be if you were in my place. Here, in
Margate, it’s measles, chicken-pox and scarlatina all the summer, and
bronchitis, colds and rheumatism all the winter. A deadly monotony.
Whereas you and Thorndyke sit there in your chambers and let your
clients feed you up with the raw material of romance. Why, your life is
a sort of everlasting Adelphi drama.”

“You exaggerate, Foxton,” said I. “We, like you, have our routine work,
only it is never heard of outside the Law Courts; and you, like every
other doctor, must run up against mystery and romance from time to
time.”

Foxton shook his head as he held out his hand for my cup. “I don’t,”
said he. “My practice yields nothing but an endless round of dull
routine.”

And then, as if in commentary on this last statement, the housemaid
burst into the room and, with hardly dissembled agitation, exclaimed:

“If you please, sir, the page from Beddingfield’s Boarding House says
that a lady has been found dead in her bed and would you go round there
immediately.”

“Very well, Jane,” said Foxton, and as the maid retired, he deliberately
helped himself to another fried egg and, looking across the table at me,
exclaimed: “Isn’t that always the way? Come immediately—now—this very
instant, although the patient may have been considering for a day or two
whether he’ll send for you or not. But directly he decides, you must
spring out of bed, or jump up from your breakfast, and run.”

“That’s quite true,” I agreed; “but this really does seem to be an
urgent case.”

“What’s the urgency?” demanded Foxton. “The woman is already dead.
Anyone would think she was in imminent danger of coming to life again
and that my instant arrival was the only thing that could prevent such a
catastrophe.”

“You’ve only a third-hand statement that she is dead,” said I. “It is
just possible that she isn’t; and even if she is, as you will have to
give evidence at the inquest, you don’t want the police to get there
first and turn out the room before you’ve made your inspection.”

“Gad!” exclaimed Foxton. “I hadn’t thought of that. Yes. You’re right.
I’ll hop round at once.”

He swallowed the remainder of the egg at a single gulp and rose from the
table. Then he paused and stood for a few moments looking down at me
irresolutely.

“I wonder, Jervis,” he said, “if you would mind coming round with me.
You know all the medico-legal ropes, and I don’t. What do you say?”

I agreed instantly, having, in fact, been restrained only by delicacy
from making the suggestion myself; and when I had fetched from my room
my pocket camera and telescopic tripod, we set forth together without
further delay.

Beddingfield’s Boarding House was but a few minutes’ walk from Foxton’s
residence, being situated near the middle of Ethelred Road,
Cliftonville, a quiet, suburban street which abounded in similar
establishments, many of which, I noticed, were undergoing a
spring-cleaning and renovation to prepare them for the approaching
season.

“That’s the house,” said Foxton, “where that woman is standing at the
front door. Look at the boarders, collected at the dining-room window.
There’s a rare commotion in that house, I’ll warrant.”

Here, arriving at the house, he ran up the steps and accosted in
sympathetic tones the elderly woman who stood by the open street door.

“What a dreadful thing this is, Mrs. Beddingfield! Terrible! Most
distressing for you!”

“Ah, you’re right, Dr. Foxton,” she replied. “It’s an awful affair.
Shocking. So bad for business, too. I do hope and trust there won’t be
any scandal.”

“I’m sure I hope not,” said Foxton. “There shan’t be if I can help it.
And as my friend, Dr. Jervis, who is staying with me for a few days, is
a lawyer as well as a doctor, we shall have the best advice. When was
the affair discovered?”

“Just before I sent for you, Dr. Foxton. The maid noticed that Mrs.
Toussaint—that is the poor creature’s name—had not taken in her hot
water, so she knocked at the door. As she couldn’t get any answer, she
tried the door and found it bolted on the inside, and then she came and
told me. I went up and knocked loudly, and then, as I couldn’t get any
reply, I told our boy, James, to force the door open with a case-opener,
which he did quite easily as the bolt was only a small one. Then I went
in, all of a tremble, for I had a presentiment that there was something
wrong; and there she was, lying stone dead, with a most ‘orrible stare
on her face and an empty bottle in her hand.”

“A bottle, eh!” said Foxton.

“Yes. She’d made away with herself, poor thing; and all on account of
some silly love affair—and it was hardly even that.”

“Ah,” said Foxton. “The usual thing. You must tell us about that later.
Now we’d better go up and see the patient—at least the—er—perhaps
you’ll show us the room, Mrs. Beddingfield.”

The landlady turned and preceded us up the stairs to the first-floor
back, where she paused, and softly opening a door, peered nervously into
the room. As we stepped past her and entered, she seemed inclined to
follow, but, at a significant glance from me, Foxton persuasively
ejected her and closed the door. Then we stood silent for a while and
looked about us.

In the aspect of the room there was something strangely incongruous with
the tragedy that had been enacted within its walls; a mingling of the
commonplace and the terrible that almost amounted to anticlimax. Through
the wide-open window the bright spring sunshine streamed in on the
garish wall-paper and cheap furniture; from the street below, the
periodic shouts of a man selling “sole and mack-ro!” broke into the
brisk staccato of a barrel-organ, and both sounds mingled with a raucous
voice close at hand, cheerfully trolling a popular song, and accounted
for by a linen-clad elbow that bobbed in front of the window and
evidently appertained to a house painter on an adjacent ladder.

It was all very commonplace and familiar and discordantly out of
character with the stark figure that lay on the bed like a waxen effigy
symbolic of tragedy. Here was none of that gracious somnolence in which
death often presents itself with a suggestion of eternal repose. This
woman was dead; horribly, aggressively dead. The thin, sallow face was
rigid as stone, the dark eyes stared into infinite space with a horrid
fixity that was quite disturbing to look on. And yet the posture of the
corpse was not uneasy, being, in fact, rather curiously symmetrical,
with both arms outside the bed-clothes and both hands closed, the right
grasping, as Mrs. Beddingfield had said, an empty bottle.

“Well,” said Foxton, as he stood looking down on the dead woman, “it
seems a pretty clear case. She appears to have laid herself out and kept
hold of the bottle so that there should be no mistake. How long do you
suppose this woman has been dead, Jervis?”

I felt the rigid limbs, and tested the temperature of the body surface.

“Not less than six hours,” I replied. “Probably more. I should say that
she died about two o’clock this morning.”

“And that is about all we can say,” said Foxton, “until the post-mortem
has been made. Everything looks quite straightforward. No signs of a
struggle or marks of violence. That blood on the mouth is probably due
to her biting her lip when she drank from the bottle. Yes; here’s a
little cut on the inside of the lip, corresponding to the upper
incisors. By the way, I wonder if there is anything left in the bottle.”

As he spoke, he drew the small, unlabelled, green glass phial from the
closed hand—out of which it slipped quite easily—and held it up to the
light.

“Yes,” he exclaimed, “there’s more than a drachm left; quite enough for
an analysis. But I don’t recognise the smell. Do you?”

I sniffed at the bottle and was aware of a faint unfamiliar vegetable
odour.

“No,” I answered. “It appears to be a watery solution of some kind, but
I can’t give it a name. Where is the cork?”

“I haven’t seen it,” he replied. “Probably it is on the floor
somewhere.”

We both stooped to look for the missing cork and presently found it in
the shadow, under the little bedside table. But, in the course of that
brief search, I found something else, which had indeed been lying in
full view all the time—a wax match. Now a wax match is a perfectly
innocent and very commonplace object, but yet the presence of this one
gave me pause. In the first place, women do not, as a rule, use wax
matches, though there was not much in that. What was more to the point
was that the candlestick by the bedside contained a box of safety
matches, and that, as the burned remains of one lay in the tray, it
appeared to have been used to light the candle. Then why the wax match?

While I was turning over this problem Foxton had corked the bottle,
wrapped it carefully in a piece of paper which he took from the
dressing-table and bestowed it in his pocket.

“Well, Jervis,” said he, “I think we’ve seen everything. The analysis
and the post-mortem will complete the case. Shall we go down and hear
what Mrs. Beddingfield has to say?”

But that wax match, slight as was its significance, taken alone, had
presented itself to me as the last of a succession of phenomena each of
which was susceptible of a sinister interpretation, and the cumulative
effect of these slight suggestions began to impress me somewhat
strongly.

“One moment, Foxton,” said I. “Don’t let us take anything for granted.
We are here to collect evidence, and we must go warily. There is such a
thing as homicidal poisoning, you know.”

“Yes, of course,” he replied, “but there is nothing to suggest it in
this case; at least, I see nothing. Do you?”

“Nothing very positive,” said I; “but there are some facts that seem to
call for consideration. Let us go over what we have seen. In the first
place, there is a distinct discrepancy in the appearance of the body.
The general easy, symmetrical posture, like that of a figure on a tomb,
suggests the effect of a slow painless poison. But look at the face.
There is nothing reposeful about that. It is very strongly suggestive of
pain or terror or both.”

“Yes,” said Foxton, “that is so. But you can’t draw any satisfactory
conclusions from the facial expression of dead bodies. Why, men who have
been hanged, or even stabbed, often look as peaceful as babes.”

“Still,” I urged, “it is a fact to be noted. Then there is that cut on
the lip. It may have been produced in the way you suggest; but it may
equally well be the result of pressure on the mouth.”

Foxton made no comment on this beyond a slight shrug of the shoulders,
and I continued:

“Then there is the state of the hand. It was closed but it did not
really grasp the object it contained. You drew the bottle out without
any resistance. It simply lay in the closed hand. But that is not a
normal state of affairs. As you know, when a person dies grasping any
object, either the hand relaxes and lets it drop, or the muscular action
passes into cadaveric spasm and grasps the object firmly. And lastly,
there is this wax match. Where did it come from? The dead woman
apparently lit her candle with a safety match from the box. It is a
small matter, but it wants explaining.”

Foxton raised his eyebrows protestingly. “You’re like all specialists,
Jervis,” said he. “You see your speciality in everything. And while you
are straining these flimsy suggestions to turn a simple suicide into
murder, you ignore the really conclusive fact that the door was bolted
and had to be broken open before anyone could get in.”

“You are not forgetting, I suppose,” said I, “that the window was wide
open and that there were house painters about and possibly a ladder left
standing against the house.”

“As to the ladder,” said Foxton, “that is a pure assumption; but we can
easily settle the question by asking that fellow out there if it was or
was not left standing last night.”

Simultaneously we moved towards the window; but half-way we both stopped
short. For the question of the ladder had in a moment become negligible.
Staring up at us from the dull red linoleum which covered the floor were
the impressions of a pair of bare feet, imprinted in white paint with
the distinctness of a woodcut. There was no need to ask if they had been
made by the dead woman: they were unmistakably the feet of a man, and
large feet at that. Nor could there be any doubt as to whence those feet
had come. Beginning with startling distinctness under the window, the
tracks diminished rapidly in intensity until they reached the carpeted
portion of the room, where they vanished abruptly; and only by the
closest scrutiny was it possible to detect the faint traces of the
retiring tracks.

Foxton and I stood for some moments gazing in silence at the sinister
white shapes; then we looked at one another.

“You’ve saved me from a most horrible blunder, Jervis,” said Foxton.
“Ladder or no ladder, that fellow came in at the window; and he came in
last night, for I saw them painting these window-sills yesterday
afternoon. Which side did he come from, I wonder?”

We moved to the window and looked out on the sill. A set of distinct,
though smeared impressions on the new paint gave unneeded confirmation
and showed that the intruder had approached from the left side, close to
which was a cast-iron stack-pipe, now covered with fresh green paint.

“So,” said Foxton, “the presence or absence of the ladder is of no
significance. The man got into the window somehow, and that’s all that
matters.”

“On the contrary,” said I, “the point may be of considerable importance
in identification. It isn’t everyone who could climb up a stack-pipe,
whereas most people could make shift to climb a ladder even if it were
guarded by a plank. But the fact that the man took off his boots and
socks suggests that he came up by the pipe. If he had merely aimed at
silencing his foot-falls he would probably have removed his boots only.”

From the window we turned to examine more closely the foot-prints on the
floor, and while I took a series of measurements with my spring tape,
Foxton entered them in my notebook.

“Doesn’t it strike you as rather odd, Jervis,” said he, “that neither of
the little toes has made any mark?”

“It does indeed,” I replied. “The appearances suggest that the little
toes were absent, but I have never met with such a condition. Have you?”

“Never. Of course one is acquainted with the supernumerary toe
deformity, but I have never heard of congenitally deficient little
toes.”

Once more we scrutinised the foot-prints, and even examined those on the
window-sill, obscurely marked on the fresh paint; but, exquisitely
distinct as were those on the linoleum, showing every wrinkle and minute
skin-marking, not the faintest hint of a little toe was to be seen on
either foot.

“It’s very extraordinary,” said Foxton. “He has certainly lost his
little toes, if he ever had any. They couldn’t have failed to make some
mark. But it’s a queer affair. Quite a windfall for the police, by the
way; I mean for purposes of identification.”

“Yes,” I agreed, “and having regard to the importance of the
foot-prints, I think it would be wise to get a photograph of them.”

“Oh, the police will see to that,” said Foxton. “Besides, we haven’t got
a camera, unless you thought of using that little toy snapshotter of
yours.”

As Foxton was no photographer I did not trouble to explain that my
camera, though small, had been specially made for scientific purposes.

“Any photograph is better than none,” I said, and with this I opened the
tripod and set it over one of the most distinct of the foot-prints,
screwed the camera to the goose-neck, carefully framed the foot-print in
the finder and adjusted the focus, finally making the exposure by means
of an Antinous release. This process I repeated four times, twice on a
right foot-print and twice on a left.

“Well,” Foxton remarked, “with all those photographs the police ought to
be able to pick up the scent.”

“Yes, they’ve got something to go on; but they’ll have to catch their
hare before they can cook him. He won’t be walking about bare-footed,
you know.”

“No. It’s a poor clue in that respect. And now we may as well be off as
we’ve seen all there is to see. I think we won’t have much to say to
Mrs. Beddingfield. This is a police case, and the less I’m mixed up in
it the better it will be for my practice.”

I was faintly amused at Foxton’s caution when considered by the light of
his utterances at the breakfast table. Apparently his appetite for
mystery and romance was easily satisfied. But that was no affair of
mine. I waited on the doorstep while he said a few—probably
evasive—words to the landlady and then, as we started off together in
the direction of the police station, I began to turn over in my mind the
salient features of the case. For some time we walked on in silence, and
must have been pursuing a parallel train of thought, for, when he at
length spoke, he almost put my reflections into words.

“You know, Jervis,” said he, “there ought to be a clue in those
foot-prints. I realise that you can’t tell how many toes a man has by
looking at his booted feet. But those unusual foot-prints ought to give
an expert a hint as to what sort of man to look for. Don’t they convey
any hint to you?”

I felt that Foxton was right; that if my brilliant colleague, Thorndyke,
had been in my place, he would have extracted from those foot-prints
some leading fact that would have given the police a start along some
definite line of inquiry; and that belief, coupled with Foxton’s
challenge, put me on my mettle.

“They offer no particular suggestions to me at this moment,” said I,
“but I think that, if we consider them systematically, we may be able to
draw some useful deductions.”

“Very well,” said Foxton, “then let us consider them systematically.
Fire away. I should like to hear how you work these things out.”

Foxton’s frankly spectatorial attitude was a little disconcerting,
especially as it seemed to commit me to a result that I was by no means
confident of attaining. I therefore began a little diffidently.

“We are assuming that both the feet that made those prints were from
some cause devoid of little toes. That assumption—which is almost
certainly correct—we treat as a fact, and, taking it as our
starting-point, the first step in the inquiry is to find some
explanation of it. Now there are three possibilities, and only three:
deformity, injury, and disease. The toes may have been absent from
birth, they may have been lost as a result of mechanical injury, or they
may have been lost by disease. Let us take those possibilities in order.

“Deformity we exclude since such a malformation is unknown to us.

“Mechanical injury seems to be excluded by the fact that the two little
toes are on opposite sides of the body and could not conceivably be
affected by any violence which left the intervening feet uninjured. This
seems to narrow the possibilities down to disease; and the question that
arises is, What diseases are there which might result in the loss of
both little toes?”

I looked inquiringly at Foxton, but he merely nodded encouragingly. His
rôle was that of listener.

“Well,” I pursued, “the loss of both toes seems to exclude local
disease, just as it excluded local injury; and as to general diseases, I
can think only of three which might produce this condition—Raynaud’s
disease, ergotism, and frost-bite.”

“You don’t call frost-bite a general disease, do you?” objected Foxton.

“For our present purpose, I do. The effects are local, but the
cause—low external temperature—affects the whole body and is a general
cause. Well, now, taking the diseases in order, I think we can exclude
Raynaud’s disease. It does, it is true, occasionally cause the fingers
or toes to die and drop off, and the little toes would be especially
liable to be affected as being most remote from the heart. But in such a
severe case the other toes would be affected. They would be shrivelled
and tapered, whereas, if you remember, the toes of these feet were quite
plump and full, to judge by the large impressions they made. So I think
we may safely reject Raynaud’s disease. There remain ergotism and
frost-bite; and the choice between them is just a question of relative
frequency. Frost-bite is more common; therefore frost-bite is more
probable.”

“Do they tend equally to affect the little toes?” asked Foxton.

“As a matter of probability, yes. The poison of ergot acting from
within, and intense cold acting from without, contract the small
blood-vessels and arrest the circulation. The feet, being the most
distant parts of the body from the heart, are the first to feel the
effects; and the little toes, which are the most distant parts of the
feet, are the most susceptible of all.”

Foxton reflected awhile, and then remarked:

“This is all very well, Jervis, but I don’t see that you are much
forrader. This man has lost both his little toes, and on your showing,
the probabilities are that the loss was due either to chronic ergot
poisoning or to frost-bite, with a balance of probability in favour of
frost-bite. That’s all. No proof, no verification. Just the law of
probability applied to a particular case, which is always
unsatisfactory. He may have lost his toes in some totally different way.
But even if the probabilities work out correctly, I don’t see what use
your conclusions would be to the police. They wouldn’t tell them what
sort of man to look for.”

There was a good deal of truth in Foxton’s objection. A man who has
suffered from ergotism or frost-bite is not externally different from
any other man. Still, we had not exhausted the case, as I ventured to
point out.

“Don’t be premature, Foxton,” said I. “Let us pursue our argument a
little farther. We have established a probability that this unknown man
has suffered either from ergotism or frost-bite. That, as you say, is of
no use by itself; but supposing we can show that these conditions tend
to affect a particular class of persons, we shall have established a
fact that will indicate a line of investigation. And I think we can. Let
us take the case of ergotism first.

“Now, how is chronic ergot poisoning caused? Not by the medicinal use of
the drug, but by the consumption of the diseased rye in which ergot
occurs. It is therefore peculiar to countries in which rye is used
extensively as food. Those countries, broadly speaking, are the
countries of North-Eastern Europe, and especially Russia and Poland.

“Then take the case of frost-bite. Obviously, the most likely person to
get frost-bitten is the inhabitant of a country with a cold climate. The
most rigorous climates inhabited by white people are North America and
North-Eastern Europe, especially Russia and Poland. So you see, the
areas associated with ergotism and frost-bite overlap to some extent. In
fact they do more than overlap; for a person even slightly affected by
ergot would be specially liable to frost-bite, owing to the impaired
circulation. The conclusion is that, racially, in both ergotism and
frost-bite, the balance of probability is in favour of a Russian, a
Pole, or a Scandinavian.

“Then in the case of frost-bite there is the occupation factor. What
class of men tend most to become frost-bitten? Well, beyond all doubt,
the greatest sufferers from frost-bite are sailors, especially those on
sailing ships, and, naturally, on ships trading to arctic and sub-arctic
countries. But the bulk of such sailing ships are those engaged in the
Baltic and Archangel trade; and the crews of those ships are almost
exclusively Scandinavians, Finns, Russians, and Poles. So that, again,
the probabilities point to a native of North-Eastern Europe, and, taken
as a whole, by the overlapping of factors, to a Russian, a Pole, or a
Scandinavian.”

Foxton smiled sardonically. “Very ingenious, Jervis,” said he. “Most
ingenious. As an academic statement of probabilities, quite excellent.
But for practical purposes absolutely useless. However, here we are at
the police station. I’ll just run in and give them the facts and then go
on to the coroner’s office.”

“I suppose I’d better not come in with you?” I said.

“Well, no,” he replied. “You see, you have no official connection with
the case, and they mightn’t like it. You’d better go and amuse yourself
while I get the morning’s visits done. We can talk things over at
lunch.”

With this he disappeared into the police station, and I turned away with
a smile of grim amusement. Experience is apt to make us a trifle
uncharitable, and experience had taught me that those who are the most
scornful of academic reasoning are often not above retailing it with
some reticence as to its original authorship. I had a shrewd suspicion
that Foxton was at this very moment disgorging my despised “academic
statement of probabilities” to an admiring police-inspector.

My way towards the sea lay through Ethelred Road, and I had traversed
about half its length and was approaching the house of the tragedy when
I observed Mrs. Beddingfield at the bay window. Evidently she recognised
me, for a few moments later she appeared in outdoor clothes on the
doorstep and advanced to meet me.

“Have you seen the police?” she asked as we met.

I replied that Dr. Foxton was even now at the police station.

“Ah!” she said, “it’s a dreadful affair; most unfortunate, too, just at
the beginning of the season. A scandal is absolute ruin to a
boarding-house. What do you think of the case? Will it be possible to
hush it up? Dr. Foxton said you were a lawyer, I think, Dr. Jervis?”

“Yes, I am a lawyer, but really I know nothing of the circumstances of
this case. Did I understand that there had been something in the nature
of a love affair?”

“Yes—at least—well, perhaps I oughtn’t to have said that. But hadn’t I
better tell you the whole story?—that is, if I am not taking up too
much of your time.”

“I should be interested to hear what led to the disaster,” said I.

“Then,” she said, “I will tell you all about it. Will you come indoors,
or shall I walk a little way with you?”

As I suspected that the police were at that moment on their way to the
house, I chose the latter alternative and led her away seawards at a
pretty brisk pace.

“Was this poor lady a widow?” I asked as we started up the street.

“No, she wasn’t,” replied Mrs. Beddingfield, “and that was the trouble.
Her husband was abroad—at least, he had been, and he was just coming
home. A pretty home-coming it will be for him, poor man. He is an
officer in the civil police at Sierra Leone, but he hasn’t been there
long. He went there for his health.”

“What! To Sierra Leone!” I exclaimed, for the “White Man’s Grave” seemed
a queer health resort.

“Yes. You see, Mr. Toussaint is a French Canadian, and it seems that he
has always been somewhat of a rolling stone. For some time he was in the
Klondyke, but he suffered so much from the cold that he had to come
away. It injured his health very severely; I don’t quite know in what
way, but I do know that he was quite a cripple for a time. When he got
better he looked out for a post in a warm climate and eventually
obtained the appointment of Inspector of Civil Police at Sierra Leone.
That was about ten months ago, and when he sailed for Africa his wife
came to stay with me, and has been here ever since.”

“And this love affair that you spoke of?”

“Yes, but I oughtn’t to have called it that. Let me explain what
happened. About three months ago a Swedish gentleman—a Mr.
Bergson—came to stay here, and he seemed to be very much smitten with
Mrs. Toussaint.”

“And she?”

“Oh, she liked him well enough. He is a tall, good-looking man—though
for that matter he is no taller than her husband, nor any better
looking. Both men are over six feet. But there was no harm so far as she
was concerned, excepting that she didn’t see the position quite soon
enough. She wasn’t very discreet, in fact I thought it necessary to give
her a little advice. However, Mr. Bergson left here and went to live at
Ramsgate to superintend the unloading of the ice ships (he came from
Sweden in one), and I thought the trouble was at an end. But it wasn’t,
for he took to coming over to see Mrs. Toussaint, and of course I
couldn’t have that. So at last I had to tell him that he mustn’t come to
the house again. It was very unfortunate, for on that occasion I think
he had been ‘tasting,’ as they say in Scotland. He wasn’t drunk, but he
was excitable and noisy, and when I told him he mustn’t come again he
made such a disturbance that two of the gentlemen boarders—Mr. Wardale
and Mr. Macauley—had to interfere. And then he was most insulting to
them, especially to Mr. Macauley, who is a coloured gentleman; called
him a ‘buck nigger’ and all sorts of offensive names.”

“And how did the coloured gentleman take it?”

“Not very well, I am sorry to say, considering that he is a gentleman—a
law student with chambers in the Temple. In fact, his language was so
objectionable that Mr. Wardale insisted on my giving him notice on the
spot. But I managed to get him taken in next door but one; you see, Mr.
Wardale had been a Commissioner at Sierra Leone—it was through him that
Mr. Toussaint got his appointment—so I suppose he was rather on his
dignity with coloured people.”

“And was that the last you heard of Mr. Bergson?”

“He never came here again, but he wrote several times to Mrs. Toussaint,
asking her to meet him. At last, only a few days ago, she wrote to him
and told him that the acquaintance must cease.”

“And has it ceased?”

“As far as I know, it has.”

“Then, Mrs. Beddingfield,” said I, “what makes you connect the affair
with—with what has happened?”

“Well, you see,” she explained, “there is the husband. He was coming
home, and is probably in England already.”

“Indeed!” said I.

“Yes,” she continued. “He went up into the bush to arrest some natives
belonging to one of these gangs of murderers—Leopard Societies, I think
they are called—and he got seriously wounded. He wrote to his wife from
hospital, saying that he would be sent home as soon as he was fit to
travel, and about ten days ago she got a letter from him saying that he
was coming by the next ship.

“I noticed that she seemed very nervous and upset when she got the
letters from hospital, and still more so when the last letter came. Of
course, I don’t know what he said to her in those letters. It may be
that he had heard something about Mr. Bergson, and threatened to take
some action. Of course, I can’t say. I only know that she was very
nervous and restless, and when we saw in the paper four days ago that
the ship he would be coming by had arrived in Liverpool, she seemed
dreadfully upset. And she got worse and worse until—well, until last
night.”

“Has anything been heard of the husband since the ship arrived?” I
asked.

“Nothing whatever,” replied Mrs. Beddingfield, with a meaning look at me
which I had no difficulty in interpreting. “No letter, no telegram, not
a word. And you see, if he hadn’t come by that ship he would almost
certainly have sent a letter by her. He must have arrived in England,
but why hasn’t he turned up, or at least sent a wire? What is he doing?
Why is he staying away? Can he have heard something? And what does he
mean to do? That’s what kept the poor thing on wires, and that, I feel
certain, is what drove her to make away with herself.”

It was not my business to contest Mrs. Beddingfield’s erroneous
deductions. I was seeking information—it seemed that I had nearly
exhausted the present source. But one point required amplifying.

“To return to Mr. Bergson, Mrs. Beddingfield,” said I. “Do I understand
that he is a seafaring man?”

“He was,” she replied. “At present he is settled at Ramsgate as manager
of a company in the ice trade, but formerly he was a sailor. I have
heard him say that he was one of the crew of an exploring ship that went
in search of the North Pole and that he was locked up in the ice for
months and months. I should have thought he would have had enough of ice
after that.”

With this view I expressed warm agreement, and having now obtained all
the information that appeared to be available, I proceeded to bring the
interview to an end.

“Well, Mrs. Beddingfield,” I said, “it is a rather mysterious affair.
Perhaps more light may be thrown on it at the inquest. Meanwhile, I
should think that it will be wise of you to keep your own counsel as far
as outsiders are concerned.”

The remainder of the morning I spent pacing the smooth stretch of sand
that lies to the east of the jetty, and reflecting on the evidence that
I had acquired in respect of this singular crime. Evidently there was no
lack of clues in this case. On the contrary, there were two quite
obvious lines of inquiry, for both the Swede and the missing husband
presented the characters of the hypothetical murderer. Both had been
exposed to the conditions which tend to produce frost-bite; one of them
had probably been a consumer of rye meal, and both might be said to have
a motive—though, to be sure, it was a very insufficient one—for
committing the crime. Still, in both cases the evidence was merely
speculative; it suggested a line of investigation, but it did nothing
more.

When I met Foxton at lunch I was sensible of a curious change in his
manner. His previous expansiveness had given place to marked reticence
and a certain official secretiveness.

“I don’t think, you know, Jervis,” he said, when I opened the subject,
“that we had better not discuss this affair. You see, I am the principal
witness, and while the case is _sub judice_—well, in fact the police
don’t want the case talked about.”

“But surely I am a witness, too, and an expert witness, moreover——”

“That isn’t the view of the police. They look on you as more or less of
an amateur, and as you have no official connection with the case, I
don’t think they propose to subpœna you. Superintendent Platt, who is in
charge of the case, wasn’t very pleased at my having taken you to the
house. Said it was quite irregular. Oh, and by the way, he says you must
hand over those photographs.”

“But isn’t Platt going to have the foot-prints photographed on his own
account?” I objected.

“Of course he is. He is going to have a set of proper photographs taken
by an expert photographer—he was mightily amused when he heard about
your little snapshot affair. Oh, you can trust Platt. He is a great man.
He has had a course of instruction at the Finger-print Department in
London.”

“I don’t see how that is going to help him, as there aren’t any
finger-prints in this case.” This was a mere fly-cast on my part, but
Foxton rose at once at the rather clumsy bait.

“Oh, aren’t there?” he exclaimed. “You didn’t happen to spot them, but
they were there. Platt has got the prints of a complete right hand. This
is in strict confidence, you know,” he added, with somewhat belated
caution.

Foxton’s sudden reticence restrained me from uttering the obvious
comment on the superintendent’s achievement. I returned to the subject
of the photographs.

“Supposing I decline to hand over my film?” said I.

“But I hope you won’t—and in fact you mustn’t. I am officially
connected with the case, and I’ve got to live with these people. As the
police-surgeon, I am responsible for the medical evidence, and Platt
expects me to get those photographs from you. Obviously you can’t keep
them. It would be most irregular.”

It was useless to argue. Evidently the police did not want me to be
introduced into the case, and after all, the superintendent was within
his rights, if he chose to regard me as a private individual and to
demand the surrender of the film.

Nevertheless I was loath to give up the photographs, at least, until I
had carefully studied them. The case was within my own speciality of
practice, and was a strange and interesting one. Moreover, it appeared
to be in unskilful hands, judging from the finger-print episode, and
then experience had taught me to treasure up small scraps of chance
evidence, since one never knew when one might be drawn into a case in a
professional capacity. In effect, I decided not to give up the
photographs, though that decision committed me to a ruse that I was not
very willing to adopt. I would rather have acted quite
straightforwardly.

“Well, if you insist, Foxton,” I said, “I will hand over the film or, if
you like, I will destroy it in your presence.”

“I think Platt would rather have the film uninjured,” said Foxton. “Then
he’ll know, you know,” he added with a sly grin.

In my heart, I thanked Foxton for that grin. It made my own guileful
proceedings so much easier; for a suspicious man invites you to get the
better of him if you can.

After lunch I went up to my room, locked the door and took the little
camera from my pocket. Having fully wound up the film, I extracted it,
wrapped it up carefully and bestowed it in my inside breast-pocket. Then
I inserted a fresh film, and going to the open window, took four
successive snapshots of the sky. This done, I closed the camera, slipped
it into my pocket and went downstairs. Foxton was in the hall, brushing
his hat, as I descended, and at once renewed his demand.

“About those photographs, Jervis,” said he, “I shall be looking in at
the police station presently, so if you wouldn’t mind——”

“To be sure,” said I. “I will give you the film now, if you like.”

Taking the camera from my pocket, I solemnly wound up the remainder of
the film, extracted it, stuck down the loose end with ostentatious care,
and handed it to him.

“Better not expose it to the light,” I said, going the whole hog of
deception, “or you may fog the exposures.”

Foxton took the spool from me as if it were hot—he was not a
photographer—and thrust it into his handbag. He was still thanking me
quite profusely when the front-door bell rang.

The visitor who stood revealed when Foxton opened the door was a small,
spare gentleman with a complexion of the peculiar brown-papery quality
that suggests long residence in the Tropics. He stepped in briskly and
introduced himself and his business without preamble.

“My name is Wardale—boarder at Beddingfield’s. I’ve called with
reference to the tragic event which——”

Here Foxton interposed in his frostiest official tone. “I am afraid, Mr.
Wardale, I can’t give you any information about the case at present.”

“I saw you two gentlemen at the house this morning,” Mr. Wardale
continued, but Foxton again cut him short.

“You did. We were there—or at least, I was—as the representative of
the law, and while the case is _sub judice_——”

“It isn’t yet,” interrupted Wardale.

“Well, I can’t enter into any discussion of it——”

“I am not asking you to,” said Wardale, a little impatiently. “But I
understand that one of you is Dr. Jervis.”

“I am,” said I.

“I must really warn you,” Foxton began again; but Mr. Wardale
interrupted testily:

“My dear sir, I am a lawyer and a magistrate and understand perfectly
well what is and what is not permissible. I have come simply to make a
professional engagement with Dr. Jervis.”

“In what way can I be of service to you?” I asked.

“I will tell you,” said Mr. Wardale. “This poor lady, whose death has
occurred in so mysterious a manner, was the wife of a man who was, like
myself, a servant of the Government of Sierra Leone. I was the friend of
both of them; and in the absence of the husband, I should like to have
the inquiry into the circumstances of this lady’s death watched by a
competent lawyer with the necessary special knowledge of medical
evidence. Will you or your colleague, Dr. Thorndyke, undertake to watch
the case for me?”

Of course I was willing to undertake the case and said so.

“Then,” said Mr. Wardale, “I will instruct my solicitor to write to you
and formally retain you in the case. Here is my card. You will find my
name in the Colonial Office List, and you know my address here.”

He handed me his card, wished us both good-afternoon, and then, with a
stiff little bow, turned and took his departure.

“I think I had better run up to town and confer with Thorndyke,” said I.
“How do the trains run?”

“There is a good train in about three-quarters of an hour,” replied
Foxton.

“Then I will go by it, but I shall come down again to-morrow or the next
day, and probably Thorndyke will come down with me.”

“Very well,” said Foxton. “Bring him in to lunch or dinner, but I can’t
put him up, I am afraid.”

“It would be better not,” said I. “Your friend, Platt, wouldn’t like it.
He won’t want Thorndyke—or me either for that matter. And what about
those photographs? Thorndyke will want them, you know.”

“He can’t have them,” said Foxton doggedly, “unless Platt is willing to
hand them back; which I don’t suppose he will be.”

I had private reasons for thinking otherwise, but I kept them to myself;
and as Foxton went forth on his afternoon round, I returned upstairs to
pack my suit-case and write the telegram to Thorndyke informing him of
my movements.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was only a quarter past five when I let myself into our chambers in
King’s Bench Walk. To my relief I found my colleague at home and our
laboratory assistant, Polton, in the act of laying tea for two.

“I gather,” said Thorndyke as we shook hands, “that my learned brother
brings grist to the mill?”

“Yes,” I replied. “Nominally a watching brief, but I think you will
agree with me that it is a case for independent investigation.”

“Will there be anything in my line, sir?” inquired Polton, who was
always agog at the word “investigation.”

“There is a film to be developed. Four exposures of white foot-prints on
a dark ground.”

“Ah!” said Polton, “you’ll want good strong negatives and they ought to
be enlarged if they are from the little camera. Can you give me the
dimensions?”

I wrote out the measurements from my notebook and handed him the paper
together with the spool of film, with which he retired gleefully to the
laboratory.

“And now, Jervis,” said Thorndyke, “while Polton is operating on the
film and we are discussing our tea, let us have a sketch of the case.”

I gave him more than a sketch, for the events were recent and I had
carefully sorted out the facts during my journey to town, making rough
notes which I now consulted. To my rather lengthy recital he listened in
his usual attentive manner, without any comment, excepting in regard to
my manœuvre to retain possession of the exposed film.

“It’s almost a pity you didn’t refuse,” said he. “They could hardly have
enforced their demand, and my feeling is that it is more convenient as
well as more dignified to avoid direct deception unless one is driven to
it. But perhaps you considered that you were.”

As a matter of fact I had at the time, but I had since come to
Thorndyke’s opinion. My little manœuvre was going to be a source of
inconvenience presently.

“Well,” said Thorndyke, when I had finished my recital, “I think we may
take it that the police theory is, in the main, your own theory derived
from Foxton.”

“I think so, excepting that I learn from Foxton that Superintendent
Platt has obtained the complete finger-prints of a right hand.”

Thorndyke raised his eyebrows. “Finger-prints!” he exclaimed, “Why, the
fellow must be a mere simpleton. But there,” he added,
“everybody—police, lawyers, magistrates and even judges—seems to lose
every vestige of common sense as soon as the subject of finger-prints is
raised. But it would be interesting to know how he got them and what
they are like. We must try to find that out. However, to return to your
case, since your theory and the police theory are probably the same, we
may as well consider the value of your inferences.

“At present we are dealing with the case in the abstract. Our data are
largely assumptions, and our inferences are largely derived from an
application of the mathematical laws of probability. Thus we assume that
a murder has been committed, whereas it may turn out to have been
suicide. We assume the murder to have been committed by the person who
made the foot-prints, and we assume that that person has no little toes,
whereas he may have retracted little toes which do not touch the ground
and so leave no impression. Assuming the little toes to be absent, we
account for their absence by considering known cases in the order of
their probability. Excluding—quite properly, I think—Raynaud’s
disease, we arrive at frost-bite and ergotism. But two persons, both of
whom are of a stature corresponding to the size of the foot-prints, may
have had a motive—though a very inadequate one—for committing the
crime, and both have been exposed to the conditions which tend to
produce frost-bite, while one of them has probably been exposed to the
conditions which tend to produce ergotism. The laws of probability point
to both of these two men; and the chances in favour of the Swede being
the murderer rather than the Canadian would be represented by the common
factor—frost-bite—multiplied by the additional factor, ergotism. But
this is purely speculative at present. There is no evidence that either
man has ever been frost-bitten or has ever eaten spurred rye.
Nevertheless, it is a perfectly sound method at this stage. It indicates
a line of investigation. If it should transpire that either man has
suffered from frost-bite or ergotism, a definite advance would have been
made. But here is Polton with a couple of finished prints. How on earth
did you manage it in the time, Polton?”

“Why, you see, sir, I just dried the film with spirit,” replied Polton.
“It saves a lot of time. I will let you have a pair of enlargements in
about a quarter of an hour.”

Handing us the two wet prints, each stuck on a glass plate, he retired
to the laboratory, and Thorndyke and I proceeded to scrutinise the
photographs with the aid of our pocket lenses. The promised enlargements
were really hardly necessary excepting for the purpose of comparative
measurements, for the image of the white foot-print, fully two inches
long, was so microscopically sharp that, with the assistance of the
lens, the minutest detail could be clearly seen.

“There is certainly not a vestige of little toe,” remarked Thorndyke,
“and the plump appearance of the other toes supports your rejection of
Raynaud’s disease. Does the character of the foot-print convey any other
suggestion to you, Jervis?”

“It gives me the impression that the man had been accustomed to go
bare-footed in early life and had only taken to boots comparatively
recently. The position of the great toe suggests this, and the presence
of a number of small scars on the toes and ball of the foot seems to
confirm it. A person walking bare-foot would sustain innumerable small
wounds from treading on small, sharp objects.”

Thorndyke looked dissatisfied. “I agree with you,” he said, “as to the
suggestion offered by the undeformed state of the great toes; but those
little pits do not convey to me the impression of scars produced as you
suggest. Still, you may be right.”

Here our conversation was interrupted by a knock on the outer oak.
Thorndyke stepped out through the lobby and I heard him open the door. A
moment or two later he re-entered, accompanied by a short, brown-faced
gentleman whom I instantly recognised as Mr. Wardale.

“I must have come up by the same train as you,” he remarked as we shook
hands, “and to a certain extent, I suspect, on the same errand. I
thought I would like to put our arrangement on a business footing, as I
am a stranger to both of you.”

“What do you want us to do?” asked Thorndyke.

“I want you to watch the case, and, if necessary, to look into the facts
independently.”

“Can you give us any information that may help us?”

Mr. Wardale reflected. “I don’t think I can,” he said at length. “I have
no facts that you have not, and any surmises of mine might be
misleading. I had rather you kept an open mind. But perhaps we might go
into the question of costs.”

This, of course, was somewhat difficult, but Thorndyke contrived to
indicate the probable liabilities involved to Mr. Wardale’s
satisfaction.

“There is one other little matter,” said Wardale as he rose to depart.
“I have got a suit-case here which Mrs. Beddingfield lent me to bring
some things up to town. It is one that Mr. Macauley left behind when he
went away from the boarding-house. Mrs. Beddingfield suggested that I
might leave it at his chambers when I had finished with it; but I don’t
know his address, excepting that it is somewhere in the Temple, and I
don’t want to meet the fellow if he should happen to have come up to
town.”

“Is it empty?” asked Thorndyke.

“Excepting for a suit of pyjamas and a pair of shocking old slippers.”
He opened the suit-case as he spoke and exhibited its contents with a
grin.

“Characteristic of a negro, isn’t it? Pink silk pyjamas and slippers
about three sizes too small.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke. “I will get my man to find out the address
and leave it there.”

As Mr. Wardale went out, Polton entered with the enlarged photographs,
which showed the foot-prints the natural size. Thorndyke handed them to
me, and as I sat down to examine them he followed his assistant to the
laboratory. He returned in a few minutes, and after a brief inspection
of the photographs, remarked:

“They show us nothing more than we have seen, though they may be useful
later. So your stock of facts is all we have to go on at present. Are
you going home to-night?”

“Yes, I shall go back to Margate to-morrow.”

“Then, as I have to call at Scotland Yard, we may as well walk to
Charing Cross together.”

As we walked down the Strand we gossiped on general topics, but before
we separated at Charing Cross, Thorndyke reverted to the case.

“Let me know the date of the inquest,” said he, “and try to find out
what the poison was—if it was really a poison.”

“The liquid that was left in the bottle seemed to be a watery solution
of some kind,” said I, “as I think I mentioned.”

“Yes,” said Thorndyke. “Possibly a watery infusion of strophanthus.”

“Why strophanthus?” I asked.

“Why not?” demanded Thorndyke. And with this and an inscrutable smile,
he turned and walked down Whitehall.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Three days later I found myself at Margate sitting beside Thorndyke in a
room adjoining the Town Hall, in which the inquest on the death of Mrs.
Toussaint was to be held. Already the coroner was in his chair, the jury
were in their seats and the witnesses assembled in a group of chairs
apart. These included Foxton, a stranger who sat by him—presumably the
other medical witness—Mrs. Beddingfield, Mr. Wardale, the police
superintendent and a well-dressed coloured man, whom I correctly assumed
to be Mr. Macauley.

As I sat by my rather sphinx-like colleague my mind recurred for the
hundredth time to his extraordinary powers of mental synthesis. That
parting remark of his as to the possible nature of the poison had
brought home to me in a flash the fact that he already had a definite
theory of this crime, and that his theory was not mine nor that of the
police. True, the poison might not be strophathus after all, but that
would not alter the position. He had a theory of the crime, but yet he
was in possession of no facts excepting those with which I had supplied
him. Therefore those facts contained the material for a theory, whereas
I had deduced from them nothing but the bald, ambiguous mathematical
probabilities.

The first witness called was naturally Dr. Foxton, who described the
circumstances already known to me. He further stated that he had been
present at the autopsy, that he had found, on the throat and limbs of
the deceased, bruises that suggested a struggle and violent restraint.
The immediate cause of death was heart failure, but whether that failure
was due to shock, terror, or the action of a poison he could not
positively say.

The next witness was a Dr. Prescott, an expert pathologist and
toxicologist. He had made the autopsy and agreed with Dr. Foxton as to
the cause of death. He had examined the liquid contained in the bottle
taken from the hand of the deceased and found it to be a watery infusion
or decoction of strophanthus seeds. He had analysed the fluid contained
in the stomach and found it to consist largely of the same infusion.

“Is infusion of strophanthus seeds used in medicine?” the coroner asked.

“No,” was the reply. “The tincture is the form in which strophanthus is
administered unless it is given in the form of strophanthine.”

“Do you consider that the strophanthus caused or contributed to death?”

“It is difficult to say,” replied Dr. Prescott. “Strophanthus is a heart
poison, and there was a very large poisonous dose. But very little had
been absorbed, and the appearances were not inconsistent with death from
shock.”

“Could death have been self-produced by the voluntary taking of the
poison?” asked the coroner.

“I should say, decidedly not. Dr. Foxton’s evidence shows that the
bottle was almost certainly placed in the hands of the deceased after
death, and this is in complete agreement with the enormous dose and
small absorption.”

“Would you say that appearances point to suicidal or homicidal
poisoning?”

“I should say that they point to homicidal poisoning, but that death was
probably due mainly to shock.”

This concluded the expert’s evidence. It was followed by that of Mrs.
Beddingfield, which brought out nothing new to me but the fact that a
trunk had been broken open and a small attaché case belonging to the
deceased abstracted and taken away.

“Do you know what the deceased kept in that case?” the coroner asked.

“I have seen her put her husband’s letters into it. She had quite a
number of them. I don’t know what else she kept in it except, of course,
her cheque book.”

“Had she any considerable balance at the bank?”

“I believe she had. Her husband used to send most of his pay home and
she used to pay it in and leave it with the bank. She might have two or
three hundred pounds to her credit.”

As Mrs. Beddingfield concluded Mr. Wardale was called, and he was
followed by Mr. Macauley. The evidence of both was quite brief and
concerned entirely with the disturbance made by Bergson, whose absence
from the court I had already noted.

The last witness was the police superintendent, and he, as I had
expected, was decidedly reticent. He did refer to the foot-prints, but,
like Foxton—who presumably had his instructions—he abstained from
describing their peculiarities. Nor did he say anything about
finger-prints. As to the identity of the criminal, that had to be
further inquired into. Suspicion had at first fastened upon Bergson, but
it had since transpired that the Swede sailed from Ramsgate on an
ice-ship two days before the occurrence of the tragedy. Then suspicion
had pointed to the husband, who was known to have landed at Liverpool
four days before the death of his wife and who had mysteriously
disappeared. But he (the superintendent) had only that morning received
a telegram from the Liverpool police informing him that the body of
Toussaint had been found floating in the Mersey, and that it bore a
number of wounds of an apparently homicidal character. Apparently he had
been murdered and his corpse thrown into the river.

“This is very terrible,” said the coroner. “Does this second murder
throw any light on the case which we are investigating?”

“I think it does,” replied the officer, without any great conviction,
however, “but it is not advisable to go into details.”

“Quite so,” agreed the coroner. “Most inexpedient. But are we to
understand that you have a clue to the perpetrator of this
crime—assuming a crime to have been committed?”

“Yes,” replied Platt. “We have several important clues.”

“And do they point to any particular individual?”

The superintendent hesitated. “Well—” he began, with some
embarrassment, but the coroner interrupted him.

“Perhaps the question is indiscreet. We mustn’t hamper the police,
gentlemen, and the point is not really material to our inquiry. You
would rather we waived that question, superintendent?”

“If you please, sir,” was the emphatic reply.

“Have any cheques from the deceased woman’s cheque-book been presented
at the bank?”

“Not since her death. I inquired at the bank only this morning.”

This concluded the evidence, and after a brief but capable summing-up by
the coroner, the jury returned a verdict of “wilful murder against some
person unknown.”

As the proceedings terminated, Thorndyke rose and turned round, and then
to my surprise I perceived Superintendent Miller, of the Criminal
Investigation Department, who had come in unperceived by me and was
sitting immediately behind us.

“I have followed your instructions, sir,” said he, addressing Thorndyke,
“but before we take any definite action I should like to have a few
words with you.”

He led the way to an adjoining room, and as we entered we were followed
by Superintendent Platt and Dr. Foxton.

“Now, doctor,” said Miller, carefully closing the door, “I have carried
out your suggestions. Mr. Macauley is being detained, but before we
commit ourselves to an arrest, we must have something to go upon. I
shall want you to make out a prima facie case.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke, laying upon the table the small, green
suit-case that was his almost invariable companion.

“I’ve seen that prima facie case before,” Miller remarked with a grin,
as Thorndyke unlocked it and drew out a large envelope. “Now, what have
you got there?”

As Thorndyke extracted from the envelope Polton’s enlargements of my
small photographs, Platt’s eyes appeared to bulge, while Foxton gave me
a quick glance of reproach.

“These,” said Thorndyke, “are the full-sized photographs of the
foot-prints of the suspected murderer. Superintendent Platt can probably
verify them.”

Rather reluctantly Platt produced from his pocket a pair of whole-plate
photographs, which he laid beside the enlargements.

“Yes,” said Miller, after comparing them, “they are the same
foot-prints. But you say, doctor, that they are Macauley’s foot-prints.
Now, what evidence have you?”

Thorndyke again had recourse to the green case, from which he produced
two copper plates mounted on wood and coated with printing ink.

“I propose,” said he, lifting the plates out of their protecting frame,
“that we take prints of Macauley’s feet and compare them with the
photographs.”

“Yes,” said Platt. “And then there are the finger-prints that we’ve got.
We can test those, too.”

“You don’t want finger-prints if you’ve got a set of toe-prints,”
objected Miller.

“With regard to those finger-prints,” said Thorndyke. “May I ask if they
were obtained from the bottle?”

“They were,” Platt admitted.

“And were there any other finger-prints?”

“No,” replied Platt. “These were the only ones.”

As he spoke he laid on the table a photograph showing the prints of the
thumb and fingers of a right hand.

Thorndyke glanced at the photograph and, turning to Miller, said:

“I suggest that those are Dr. Foxton’s finger-prints.”

“Impossible!” exclaimed Platt, and then suddenly fell silent.

“We can soon see,” said Thorndyke, producing from the case a pad of
white paper. “If Dr. Foxton will lay the finger-tips of his right hand
first on this inked plate and then on the paper, we can compare the
prints with the photograph.”

Foxton placed his fingers on the blackened plate and then pressed them
on the paper pad, leaving on the latter four beautifully clear, black
finger-prints. These Superintendent Platt scrutinised eagerly, and as
his glance travelled from the prints to the photographs he broke into a
sheepish grin.

“Sold again!” he muttered. “They are the same prints.”

“Well,” said Miller in a tone of disgust, “you must have been a mug not
to have thought of that when you knew that Dr. Foxton had handled the
bottle.”

“The fact, however, is important,” said Thorndyke. “The absence of any
finger-prints but Dr. Foxton’s not only suggests that the murderer took
the precaution to wear gloves, but especially it proves that the bottle
was not handled by the deceased during life. A suicide’s hands will
usually be pretty moist and would leave conspicuous, if not very clear,
impressions.”

“Yes,” agreed Miller, “that is quite true. But with regard to these
foot-prints. We can’t compel this man to let us examine his feet without
arresting him. Don’t think, Dr. Thorndyke, that I suspect you of
guessing. I’ve known you too long for that. You’ve got your facts all
right, I don’t doubt, but you must let us have enough to justify our
arrest.”

Thorndyke’s answer was to plunge once more into the inexhaustible green
case, from which he now produced two objects wrapped in tissue paper.
The paper being removed, there was revealed what looked like a model of
an excessively shabby pair of brown shoes.

“These,” said Thorndyke, exhibiting the “models” to Superintendent
Miller—who viewed them with an undisguised grin—“are plaster casts of
the interiors of a pair of slippers—very old and much too
tight—belonging to Mr. Macauley. His name was written inside them. The
casts have been waxed and painted with raw umber, which has been lightly
rubbed off, thus accentuating the prominences and depressions. You will
notice that the impressions of the toes on the soles and of the
‘knuckles’ on the uppers appear as prominences; in fact we have in these
casts a sketchy reproduction of the actual feet.

“Now, first as to dimensions. Dr. Jervis’s measurements of the
foot-prints give us ten inches and three-quarters as the extreme length
and four inches and five-eighths as the extreme width at the heads of
the metatarsus. On these casts, as you see, the extreme length is ten
inches and five-eighths—the loss of one-eighth being accounted for by
the curve of the sole—and the extreme width is four inches and a
quarter—three-eighths being accounted for by the lateral compression of
a tight slipper. The agreement of the dimensions is remarkable,
considering the unusual size. And now as to the peculiarities of the
feet. You notice that each toe has made a perfectly distinct impression
on the sole, excepting the little toe, of which there is no trace in
either cast. And, turning to the uppers, you notice that the knuckles of
the toes appear quite distinct and prominent—again excepting the little
toes, which have made no impression at all. Thus it is not a case of
retracted little toes, for they would appear as an extra prominence.
Then, looking at the feet as a whole, it is evident that the little toes
are absent; there is a distinct hollow where there should be a
prominence.”

“M’yes,” said Miller dubiously, “it’s all very neat. But isn’t it just a
bit speculative?”

“Oh, come, Miller,” protested Thorndyke; “just consider the facts. Here
is a suspected murderer known to have feet of an unusual size and
presenting a very rare deformity; and here are a pair of feet of that
same unusual size and presenting that same rare deformity; and they are
the feet of a man who had actually lived in the same house as the
murdered woman and who, at the date of the crime, was living only two
doors away. What more would you have?”

“Well, there is the question of motive,” objected Miller.

“That hardly belongs to a prima facie case,” said Thorndyke. “But even
if it did, is there not ample matter for suspicion? Remember who the
murdered woman was, what her husband was, and who this Sierra Leone
gentleman is.”

“Yes, yes; that’s true,” said Miller somewhat hastily, either perceiving
the drift of Thorndyke’s argument (which I did not), or being unwilling
to admit that he was still in the dark. “Yes, we’ll have the fellow in
and get his actual foot-prints.”

He went to the door and, putting his head out, made some sign, which was
almost immediately followed by a trampling of feet, and Macauley entered
the room, followed by two large plain-clothes policemen. The negro was
evidently alarmed, for he looked about him with the wild expression of a
hunted animal. But his manner was aggressive and truculent.

“Why am I being interfered with in this impertinent manner?” he demanded
in the deep, buzzing voice characteristic of the male negro.

“We want to have a look at your feet, Mr. Macauley,” said Miller. “Will
you kindly take off your shoes and socks?”

“No,” roared Macauley. “I’ll see you damned first.”

“Then,” said Miller, “I arrest you on a charge of having murdered——”

The rest of the sentence was drowned in a sudden uproar. The tall,
powerful negro, bellowing like an angry bull, had whipped out a large,
strangely shaped knife and charged furiously at the superintendent. But
the two plain-clothes men had been watching him from behind and now
sprang upon him, each seizing an arm. Two sharp, metallic clicks in
quick succession, a thunderous crash and an ear-splitting yell, and the
formidable barbarian lay prostrate on the floor with one massive
constable sitting astride his chest and the other seated on his knees.

“Now’s your chance, doctor,” said Miller. “I’ll get his shoes and socks
off.”

As Thorndyke re-inked his plates, Miller and the local superintendent
expertly removed the smart patent shoes and the green silk socks from
the feet of the writhing, bellowing negro. Then Thorndyke rapidly and
skilfully applied the inked plates to the soles of the feet—which I
steadied for the purpose—and followed up with a dexterous pressure of
the paper pad, first to one foot and then—having torn off the printed
sheet—to the other. In spite of the difficulties occasioned by
Macauley’s struggles, each sheet presented a perfectly clear and sharp
print of the sole of the foot, even the ridge-patterns of the toes and
ball of the foot being quite distinct. Thorndyke laid each of the new
prints on the table beside the corresponding large photograph, and
invited the two superintendents to compare them.

“Yes,” said Miller—and Superintendent Platt nodded his
acquiescence—“there can’t be a shadow of a doubt. The ink-prints and
the photographs are identical, to every line and skin-marking. You’ve
made out your case, doctor, as you always do.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

“So you see,” said Thorndyke, as we smoked our evening pipes on the old
stone pier, “your method was a perfectly sound one, only you didn’t
apply it properly. Like too many mathematicians, you started on your
calculations before you had secured your data. If you had applied the
simple laws of probability to the real data, they would have pointed
straight to Macauley.”

“How do you suppose he lost his little toes?” I asked.

“I don’t suppose at all. Obviously it was a case of double ainhum.”

“Ainhum!” I exclaimed with a sudden flash of recollection.

“Yes; that was what you overlooked. You compared the probabilities of
three diseases either of which only very rarely causes the loss of even
one little toe and infinitely rarely causes the loss of both, and none
of which conditions is confined to any definite class of persons; and
you ignored ainhum, a disease which attacks almost exclusively the
little toe, causing it to drop off, and quite commonly destroys both
little toes—a disease, moreover, which is confined to the black-skinned
races. In European practice ainhum is unknown, but in Africa, and to a
less extent, in India, it is quite common. If you were to assemble all
the men in the world who have lost both little toes, more than
nine-tenths of them would be suffering from ainhum; so that, by the laws
of probability, your foot-prints were, by nine chances to one, those of
a man who had suffered from ainhum, and therefore a black-skinned man.
But as soon as you had established a black man as the probable criminal,
you opened up a new field of corroborative evidence. There was a black
man on the spot. That man was a native of Sierra Leone and almost
certainly a man of importance there. But the victim’s husband had deadly
enemies in the native secret societies of Sierra Leone. The letters of
the husband to the wife probably contained matter incriminating certain
natives of Sierra Leone. The evidence became cumulative, you see. Taken
as a whole, it pointed plainly to Macauley, apart from the new fact of
the murder of Toussaint in Liverpool, a city with a considerable
floating population of West Africans.”

“And I gather from your reference to the African poison, strophanthus,
that you fixed on Macauley at once when I gave you my sketch of the
case?”

“Yes; especially when I saw your photographs of the foot-prints with the
absent little toes and those characteristic chigger-scars on the toes
that remained. But it was sheer luck that enabled me to fit the keystone
into its place and turn mere probability into virtual certainty. I could
have embraced the magician Wardale when he brought us the magic
slippers. Still, it isn’t an absolute certainty, even now, though I
expect it will be by to-morrow.”

And Thorndyke was right. That very evening the police entered Macauley’s
chambers in Tanfield Court, where they discovered the dead woman’s
attaché case. It still contained Toussaint’s letters to his wife, and
one of those letters mentioned by name, as members of a dangerous secret
society, several prominent Sierra Leone men, including the accused David
Macauley.

                                THE END